tracing: Document tracing on NILRT (#76)
ni/nilrt-docs: docs/source/troubleshooting/tracing.rst

==================================================
Tracing on NI Linux Real-Time
==================================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Introduction
============

When debugging latency issues, race conditions, or hangs on real-time embedded targets, it is useful to know what the kernel/OS was doing just prior to the error condition. Acquiring and analyzing a kernel event or function trace can provide insights into latency spikes, race conditions, lock contention, priority inversions, missed loop iterations and so on.

> This documents covers using the kernel ftrace system.

Reviewer: s%documents%document%

> On NI Linux Real-Time (NILRT) there are several higher level tools that can be used for this like the "LabVIEW Execution Trace Toolkit". Documentation for using those tools is available elsewhere. This document only covers using the lower level APIs for interacting with the kernel ftrace system.

Reviewer: Do we recommend using the execution trace tookit? If we do, then we should link to its documentation. If not, then we should drop mentioning it here and keep focus on what this doc *is* about.

Author: RTETT has been broken for a while but with some manual fixes it can be made to work. But those VIs are going to be replaced in next release. Removed the whole section.

ftrace
======

> On NILRT systems the kernel debugfs is mounted at `/sys/kernel/debug`. The ftrace subsystem can be controlled via pseudo-files at `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing`. For a quick description of the configuration knobs available, see `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing/README`.

Reviewer: In RST, the single-backtick (`) marks text for "domain-specific interpretation". In this case, sphinx just makes it _italics_. Inline literals are marked up with double-backticks (``). (I forget this every time too.)

In this line, and throughout the document, you should use the latter for commands, program names, and paths.

> Below is the typical sequence to start an *event trace* from a ssh/serial terminal prompt. The same operations can be performed via file read/writes from other programming languages including LabVIEW.

Reviewer: "... other programming languages, including LabVIEW."

> Below is the typical sequence to start an *event trace* from a ssh/serial terminal prompt. The same operations can be performed via file read/writes from other programming languages including LabVIEW.

Reviewer: "... from an SSH/serial terminal prompt."

.. note::
   Files under `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing` are text files, use appropriate LabVIEW primitives when accessing them.

.. note::

>    Tracing is a privileged operation. On older versions of NILRT, file ownership and/or permissions have to be adjusted when used from LabVIEW; e.g., with `chown -R lvuser:ni /sys/kernel/debug/tracing`. This change will not persist across a reboot.

Reviewer: What are "older versions"?

> #. Stop any ongoing tracing and clear the buffer

Reviewer: These enums are complete sentences. They should end with periods.

>    .. code:: text

Reviewer: Why use text highlighting, and not `bash`?

      echo 0 > /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/tracing_on
      echo 0 > /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace

> #. Enable tracing all events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Enable tracing for all events
```

   .. code:: text

      echo 1 > /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/events/enable

#. Start tracing

   .. code:: text

      echo 1 > /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/tracing_on

#. (optional) Add custom markers to the trace

>    A useful option is inserting custom markers into the trace to track the application progress. This can be done by writing into the trace_marker file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Insert custom markers into the trace to track the application progress. This can be done by writing into the trace_marker file:
```

Author: Slightly reworded

   .. code:: bash

      echo "something happened" > /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace_marker

   Use this with caution and sparingly. Writing to the trace buffer adds additional latency.

Analyzing the results
=====================

> The resulting trace can be extracted with `trace-cmd` which can be installed from pacakges feeds with

Reviewer: s%pacakges%packages%

> The resulting trace can be extracted by reading the `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace` file directly. This will output a human readable textual representation. However this is usually pretty slow especially on large traces.

Reviewer: Instead of "However this is usually pretty slow especially on large traces.", what about...

Reading the trace can be a slow operation, if it is large.

> A better alternative is to use the `trace-cmd` utility which can be installed from package feeds with

Reviewer: If it is a "better alternative", then we should have just recommended that first and suggested direct reading as an alternative if they cannot use `trace-cmd`.

   opkg install trace-cmd

To extract the trace, use

.. code:: bash

   trace-cmd extract

The resulting trace file `trace.dat` can then be loaded in the front-end GUI tool `kernelshark` for off-target analysis.

   .. image:: resources/trace-loaded-in-kernelshark.png

`kernelshark` can be used on a Linux desktop distribution or on Windows with Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).

Alternatively, trace can also be extracted by reading `/sys/kernel/debug/tracing/trace` file directly. This will output a human readable textual representation. Reading the trace can be a slow operation, if it is large.

LabVIEW Threads
---------------

The trace will contain threads created by LabVIEW Real-Time process (lvrt).
The full list of these threads can be obtained by running

.. code:: bash

>    cat /proc/`pidof lvrt`/task/*/status | grep Name

Reviewer: Let's standardize on using the explicit subshell notation `$(...)` rather than backticks. Backticks are harder to notice in the string and most bash styleguides recommend the parenthesis notation.

Some common threads are

.. csv-table:: LabVIEW Real-Time threads
   :file: resources/lvrt-threads.csv
   :widths: 20, 60
   :header-rows: 1

Additional information and resources
====================================

* Linux Tracing Technologies - https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/trace/index.html
* Debugging the kernel using Ftrace - part 1: https://lwn.net/Articles/365835/
* Debugging the kernel using Ftrace - part 2: https://lwn.net/Articles/366796/
* trace-cmd: A front-end for Ftrace: https://lwn.net/Articles/410200/
* KernelShark documentation - https://kernelshark.org/Documentation.html

> * Using KernelShark to analyze the real-time scheduler: https://lwn.net/Articles/425583/

Reviewer: Can you make these RST links?

Author: Do you mean something like https://sublime-and-sphinx-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/references.html#links-to-external-web-pages where the link is not displayed separately but embedded inside the target?

Reviewer: Yes.

Author: Done
